# Guide - Write DOM with Javascript without HTML

The foundamental part of a browser is the view, it is defined by the *DOM* and *HTML* is the langage to express it.

The DOM can be manipulated with Javascript like this:

```js
const div = document.createElement('div');
div.textContent = 'Hello';
document.body.append(div);
```

This way, you can build everything you want for the user to interact with it, it uses the imperative programming paradigm. But in a large application this can leads to inconsistencies because a human is in charge of synchronizing the data model with the view by removing, updating and inserting DOM elements. This was done like this for years within the area of jQuery.

More recently in the area of AngularJS and ReactJS, a new paradigm has been used, the declarative programming. The principal is to *declare* the view depending on the data model, just like a function. For one input, we always have one view output. The magic is done by a diff algorithm which will take care of the updates of the DOM according to the new "view output" generated by your declared view. Let's take a simple example:

```js
h('div', model.name)
```

This declare the equivalent of `<div>Hello</div>` with `model.name = 'Hello'`. When we modify the name attribute, the `h` function will produce a new view because the argument has changed. In the background the div element will *not be recreated but updated*.

This way of declaring the DOM is called Hyperscript, more information in [this guide](./vnodes.md).
